Dave Cahn
December 6, 1997
Updated 26 February, 1999
It is with great sadness that I pass on to the 505 class membership news of Dave Cahn's sudden death on Saturday December 6th, while racing his 505.

I received the following message from Vickie Gilmour Sunday December 7th morning.

 

" Dave Cahn, a 505 sailor from SF Bay passed away in his 505, FEVER PITCH, on the first windward leg of the Richmond YC Midwinter regatta today, Dec. 6. He had been a part of the fun SF fleet for approximately 20 years. He was a good sailor with some streaks of brilliance and a fun person with a wonderful smile. Our hearts go out to his wife, Egg. He will be greatly missed.
Vickie Gilmour"

I first met Dave at the 1981 (San Francisco) World Championship; he and Egg put up several of the Canadian competitors in their home. Dave had been more active in 505s recently, racing a number of events including the 1995 pre-worlds with Simon Lake, the '97 North Americans with Will Hartje, and the recent 1997 Worlds with 505 Class President, Pip Pearson. It seems like only yesterday that we were laughing with Dave in the dinghy park in Gilleleje, and then having dinner in Copenhagen together.

While I do not have any details, it is my understanding that Dave had a heart attack while racing his 505.

To me, the 505 class is about a great deal more than just trying to win sailboat races. Sure the boats are incredible and the racing is top notch, but the class is also a wonderful group of people around the world. People who enjoy the camaraderie of the class, renewing old friendships and making new ones, laughing about a race in the dinghy park, and going out for a meal with their mates. I think Dave exemplified this as much as anyone.

Ali Meller
VP International 505 Class Yacht Racing Association
7200 & 8263
Dave made a lot of friends in the 505 class over the years; here are some other messages about Dave.

 

" I, too learned of Dave Cahn's death yesterday. I think I sent the information to the old address. Dave had recently been sailing with me on our Antrim 27 and was valued for his intelligence, his good humor, his loyalty and, most of all, for his friendship. We shall miss him greatly. It was, perhaps the way that any 505er might choose but he was far too young to leave us. Our prayers go to his wife.
Dennis Surtees "

 

" I was stunned and saddened this morning to read on the "net" of the passing of Dave Cahn. Dave and I teamed up (having never previously met) to sail the Worlds at Gilleleje back in August and we "hit it off" really well and really enjoyed the camaraderie and the competition of the Class at Gilleleje. We borrowed a boat from Simon Lake in England so we were very much an "International Entrant" Under these circumstances we were never going to be a "threat" to the front runners, but this combination of skipper, crew and boat in no way deterred Dave's determination to do as well as he could. We had a wonderful time in Denmark and after three weeks I had yet another very special 505 friend on the other side of the world. Dave was very much a sailing and 505 enthusiast, a mild mannered, polite gentleman in the true sense of the old fashioned use of the word "gentlemen". I can't believe that after only knowing the man for 4 months that he is no longer with us.
I send my condolences to all the 505 guys in the S.F. fleet who were close to Dave and must be affected by this incident.
On the philosophical side of things; knowing that one day we will all be going at some time or other I can only remark what a wonderful way to leave this world. Doing what you love.

Pip Pearson
International President. "

 

"I crewed for Dave off and on in the years while I was a graduate student at Stanford University. Dave and I had many a latte together in North Beach before heading over to the St. Francis.
While balancing a busy life (including a brilliant and demanding technical career), Dave never failed to maintain his interest and enthusiasm for 505 sailing. He had an exuberant spirit, a good sense of humor, and a balanced perspective. Fully aware of the constraints that kept us from winning, we thrived on doing the best that we could, enjoying the screaming reaches, and just being part of the scenery. This was my first real exposure to competitive racing under severe constraints (of career and family) and Dave was incredibly tolerant of my "hot-shot" mentality. Although I'd sailed competitively all my life and always enjoyed the sport, sailing with Dave taught me that is IS possible to still enjoy competing even while knowing the odds against ever winning or placing (given our level of commitment). I like to think that sailors like Dave personify the 505 class and I know that they are the backbone of the sport's success. Dave truly loved the 505 -- he raced for the thrill of it and to support the whole idea. His death is very sadly premature. Although one is tempted to say that "at least Dave died doing something that he loved", there is painfully little consolation in that.

My prayers go out to Dave's family ... I did not know his wife well (I think we only met once), but I would like for her to know that I (and many others like me) cared a lot for Dave.

Bill Ball"

 

" ... I was very sad to hear this bad news. Frisco, Uli and me are very sorry.
Unfortunately time in Gilleleje was too short to get to know hin a little better. But we had much fun during that time. I remember when I was sailing the preworlds with Frisco we we had very hard fights at the course --- and later at the dinghy park it took us some time and some beers to discuss the manouvers and to think who was in front of the other. I think Pip will remember it as well.

Please forward our deep compassion to his family and tell his wife we are thinking of him. Please excuse my bad English, but itīs always hard to find the right words in such a situation, especially in a foreign language.

Frisco, Uli and Angela
Germany"

 

" I have spoken to Dave's wife, Eileen ... She tells me that Dave's Memorial Service will be held at 1900 hours next Tuesday, 16th December at Berkeley Yacht Club. If anyone out there has any words they wish to be conveyed, let me know. I have copied the various messages already received.
Dennis Surtees
dsurtees@worldnet.att.net "

 

"We were all deeply shocked to hear of the untimely death of David Cahn. I hope you will be able to pass on our feelings of sympathy to his wife and family. I understand that he died sailing his 505, I suppose if he had to go, that would be the preferred way. Condolences from all his friends in the British Fleet.
Jim Berry President. UK 505 Fleet"

 

" I first met Dave Cahn in 1977 when he asked me for some unknown reason to sail with him in the 505 North American Championships at Port Townsend, WA. Man, oh man I was eager as a beaver when Dave picked me up in his Ford Mustang with Henry Jotz's old White Lightning in toe. I just finished recording the Allman Bros. Eat A Peach and I was hoping Dave would like it. Dave liked Blue Sky and Melissa the best. Anyway, it is a long drive from Alameda, CA to Port Townsend, WA. I was just a kid, I did have my drivers license, but I did not have much driving experience. Dave drove on and on, he talked about this and that and then he got tired of driving. He asked me if I would take over the driving chore. I said "sure". So Dave found a rest stop and pulled in. I got behind the wheel of this hot rod ( I'm not sure of the specs of Dave's Mustang, but I'm sure it's a hassle to get smogged) and asked "How do you put this thing in gear and what happens when you want to change gears?" Dave looks at me and says something like "Oh darn" or "Oh shoot" or something along those lines and asks me if I have ever driven a stick shift before. "Not yet" is all I can reply. Dave cringes and replaces me with himself in the driver's seat and proceeds to find a proper side road to teach a kid to use a clutch on a hot rod Mustang. It worked. Dave taught me all I needed to know within five minutes and fifty feet of burnt rubber. I took over the driving responsibilities but unfortunately, the much needed rest that Dave needed never materialized because in the Southern Oregon portion of Highway Five there are steep enough hills that a neophyte hot rod clutch driver had to go through many awkward gear changes and Dave was not comfortable with it. I think poor Dave had to drive about 95% of our Great Northwest sailing adventure.
But I learned more than just mechanical things from and about Dave on that trip. I learned that Dave competed fair and hard. Dave always was looking for new advantage and to protect what we (he) had gained. But he did it by the rules. When I sailed with Dave and when I competed against him, I cannot remember one instance where racing rules were violated and not rectified. Dave was the ultimate in true sportsman. I learned a lot from him.

Jim Wondolleck"


 

"It was my privilege to sail with Dave in a 505 on several occasions, the first being during the 1995 Pre-World championships at Mounts Bay in a fleet of 150 boats. This arrangement was made via the 505 E-mail list, perhaps the first international pairing made this way.
We subsequently met up and sailed on San Francisco Bay several times and I was able to loan Dave and Pip Pearson, the same boat Dave and I sailed in 1995, for the 1997 Worlds in Gilleleje.

Dave was a great character, very likeable, and full of enthusiasm for the sport and the technical aspects behind the sport, and I suspect he approached every aspect of his life this way.

Dave was adopted by the Grafham Water 505 Fleet during the Mounts Bay event, and all of us in the Fleet and the many other UK sailors who knew him, including some who met Dave for the first time this summer in Denmark, have been greatly saddened by his passing. We have all lost a good friend.

It was particularly shocking to find that someone as active as Dave had been taken from us in this way, and whilst there can be no good way of passing, doing so doing something you love must be better way to go than most.

Our thoughts and deepest condolences are with Daves wife Eileen.

Simon J Lake
GBR8635/GBR8494
Grafham Water 505 Fleet"


 

"Dave and I often battled it out at the back of the fleet, usually to the tune of "youth and energy not being any match for old age and treachery". The news hit me pretty hard on Monday. Dave was one of the most warm and friendly people in the fleet here (that says alot)... My first memory of Dave was my first regatta in a 505. It was here in Santa Cruz, the wind was blowing 30-35 and we were doing alot of swimming. I was pretty discouraged that we didn't even finish a single race at our first regatta and that everyone else stayed out in the breeze, when lo and behold, Dave and his boat were limping back into the harbor right next to me. He boosted my confidence immensely at the dock by reminding me of the difficulty of what we just had attempted.
Eric Willis"


