https://www.proboat.com/2019/11/mark-lindsay-a-life-in-boatbuilding/ Mark
Lindsay, a Life in Boatbuilding By Paul Lazarus, Nov 11, 2019

Boston BoatWorks master builder Mark Lindsay works the trapeze of an
International 505 racing dinghy as sailcloth manufacturer Bob Bainbridge
handles the helm, at the class’s East Coast championships off Newport, Rhode
Island, in 1979. (Mark and his wife, Sally, won the North American
championship the year before.) Lindsay’s expertise in advanced composites and
construction processes began with high-performance one-design small craft like
the 505, a class he considers “the best boat ever.”

In Professional BoatBuilder No.182, Paul Lazarus noted the September 6 passing
of Mark Lindsay, and included a personal appreciation of his work and
influence in the boatbuilding industry and on this magazine over the years.
What follows is an excerpt from Lazarus’s 2015 article about Lindsay’s Boston
BoatWorks (PBB No. 157) that provides a more thorough account of the builder’s
resume—a full and remarkable career in our industry. —Ed.

Mark Lindsay’s boatbuilding career goes way back, to his teens, spanning
several one-design and rule boats, and producing numerous champions—Sailfish,
Stars, 505s, Fireballs, Flying Dutchmans, Tornadoes, MORC, IOR, and IMS
boats—plus much of the technical work on America³, the 1992 winner of the
America’s Cup. The reason so many of his boats have been so successful is that
he is always searching for strong, lightweight structures, and was among the
first builders to use—in boats—what were previously thought of as exclusively
aerospace materials.

Trained at MIT

It is no accident that most of Lindsay’s building career has been committed to
sail, the bulk of it to very small craft, and the faster the better. His
exploration of how to exploit composites to make sail-powered small craft
lighter, stronger, faster began at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
where he studied for a graduate degree in architecture and architectural
engineering. (Lindsay started college at Middlebury, but dropped out to work
as an “apprentice laborer” in a Marblehead boatyard that had been commissioned
to build an A-Cup contender, before pursuing an undergraduate degree in
architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.)

Taking information gleaned in a structures course at MIT, Lindsay would test
samples to failure in the materials lab. Meanwhile, MIT’s Sailing Pavilion,
a boathouse on the Charles River laying claim as the birthplace of competitive
college sailing in this country, served as a test tank for him, racing
so-called Tech Dinghies. The design dates to 1935, when MIT naval
architecture/marine engineering professor George Owen drew the plans and the
Herreshoff Manufacturing Co. produced a fleet of 30. Today’s Tech Dinghy, the
design’s sixth generation, is a carbon fiber raceboat.

For Lindsay, the interaction of his MIT structures studies and sail-racing
experience was formative: it taught him, he said, the important difference
between stiffness and strength. Understanding that distinction enabled him,
when he turned professional, to give his boats a truly competitive edge by
lightening them within a class’s parameters, while making them strong enough
for the crew to stress the sailing rig without destroying structure.

Tinkering and testing

After he’d set up shop as an independent builder specializing, at first, in
small raceboats, Lindsay continued to experiment with materials and methods.
Precisely because the product was small, he could test many iterations within
a relatively short time frame. His boats’ overall success on the race course
generated more and more business for him in a market niche that, though
popular, was also notorious for small profit margins.

A good example of his experimental construction efforts over time came to the
magazine’s attention in 1996, when he was based in Gloucester, Massachusetts,
as Lindsay Custom Yachts. Responding to an article we’d recently published on
switching to high-performance resin systems, Lindsay wrote in to say:

Kevlar, foam and honeycomb

“Since 1979, I have built over 50 International 505 sailboats in production
female molds with polyester gelcoat and epoxy laminate, and I can attest to
the challenges of innovating with construction techniques. We knew it would be
hard to get a successful bond, and just kept trying until we invented
a solvent and technique that usually worked. It allowed us to build very
light, strong Kevlar laminates with foam and honeycomb cores, and still have
a durable in-mold finish. What was a tricky process then, seems routine with
today’s products.

“When we started building production boats with 250°F [121°C] epoxy prepregs
in 1983, we found a whole new set of gelcoat challenges. One of the more
interesting solutions was a polyurethane gelcoat developed for automotive
parts. Searching for new answers is what maintains the fascination in this
profession.”

Additional examples of R&D that Lindsay conducted (and this magazine reported)
years ago include low-cost ways to post-cure epoxy laminates, plus innovative
solutions for attaching heavily loaded rigging hardware. Little wonder, then,
that Bob Johnstone tapped Boston BoatWorks for his nascent MJM Yachts venture.
Lindsay’s many projects over many years feature fearless composite
construction, with nearly all those projects high-performance sailboats.

A Mark Lindsay-built Taylor 40

A Lindsay-built Taylor 40 (12.2m) at Key West Race Week about 25 years ago
with the builder, as he puts it, “driving the bus.” Scott Smith owned and
campaigned another Lindsay-built Taylor 40, which helped bring the two men
together in 1990, to form the business partnership that became Boston
BoatWorks. They share not just a passion for fast sailing but “all operational
responsibilities” at BBW as well.

And fortunately, BBW has been an excellent fit for MJM. In a marketing video
for MJM we’ll review later, Johnstone, at the helm of a 40z traveling offshore
    at speed in tricky seas, says in a voice-over why he selected Lindsay:
    “The key to more responsive handling is to build an MJM not like
    a powerboat but like a racing sailboat. So we turned to a builder
    of … racing sailboats, Mark Lindsay. Mark had been working with high-tech
    composites for 33 years.”

-----------------------


https://www.sailingscuttlebutt.com/2019/09/09/eight-bells-mark-lindsay/

Eight Bells: Mark Lindsay
Published on September 9th, 2019

Few people touched the full range of the sport as Mark Lindsay, 75, who passed
away unexpectedly on September 6 in Gloucester, MA. From dinghies to
keelboats, from powerboats to America’s Cup boats, Mark was a high-tech
boat-building pioneer. Here Mark tells his story:

My childhood summers were spent in a small town on the coast of Connecticut.
Although the town beach attracted the crowds, the best-kept secret was in an
old weathered boat shop at the foot of Waterside Lane.

I spent hours there, watching the local lobster boats take shape under the
practiced eye and knowing hands of a septuagenarian craftsman who worked the
oak and cedar with little more than a half model to guide him. The process
that brought all the pieces together to create the flowing lines of sea-kindly
hulls fascinated me. It was the innocent beginning of a lifelong passion.

At 14 my father helped me buy a kit to build my first boat, a Sailfish. His
enjoyment in helping me as we drilled and set the bronze screws in the
mahogany, planed and sanded, taught me the value of putting your energy into
something you love. I also learned how much fun it is to share that process
with others who are just as excited as you are.

Two summers later, away from home and working at my first job on Cape Cod,
that Sailfish won a season championship for me, and I was hooked on learning
what makes boats go faster.

I left college in the middle of my sophomore year to build boats, and landed
a job in Marblehead at the yard where the 12 Metres Nefertiti and Easterner
were being fitted out for the America’s Cup.

On my first day at work, in the depths of a New England winter, they handed me
a pickaxe and shovel and said, “Dig a ditch three feet deep from this shed to
that one and come back when you’re done.” After that I was assigned to
building fiberglass Formula V race car bodies, in a cramped corner under the
eaves of the lofting floor. I was beginning to learn there is a lot of hard
work in boat building.

Back at college a year later, I studied architecture at the University of
Pennsylvania and then architecture and architectural engineering at MIT. The
structures classes opened my mind to the important distinctions between
stiffness and strength, and the materials testing lab provided a fascinating
opportunity to load the structures and watch how they failed.

I also found myself inevitably drawn to the MIT Sailing Pavilion where the
Charles River was a test tank for all our ideas on what makes boats go faster.

The next diversion in my education was several years of building Olympic Class
Star boats with World Champion Joe Duplin. Joe has always loved the
cross-fertilization of ideas in completely diverse areas like hydrodynamics,
sports psychology, and materials technology.

Our coffee breaks were like graduate seminars as we stretched our minds to
encompass Joe’s images such as, “If I were a water molecule.” In that shop we
built our first epoxy boat 30 years ago, and the exceptional strength and
weight characteristics were immediately obvious.

In the early ’70s, Dick Carter’s yacht design office north of Boston attracted
an eclectic group of international clients and young designers. When the
future America’s Cup designer Doug Petersen left Carter’s office to start his
own business, I brashly applied for the job and won it.

I shared an office with Carter’s computer expert, Chuck Paine, and soon
afterward we hired another young aspiring designer, Bob Perry, who had a few
years previously given up a career as a rock musician.

At the time I was racing sailboats in the very lightweight and overpowered
International 505 class. The contrast between the high-performance composite
construction of those sailing dinghies and the typical aluminum or wood
construction of offshore racing boats lead me to wonder if boats could be
built even lighter, stronger and, therefore, faster.

I found a chance to test out those ideas when the Carter yacht design staff
was laid off in the winter of 1975, and a friend asked me to build him
a sailboat to compete in a World Championship. I rented a loft in a barn on
Boston’s North Shore, and designed and built an International Fireball Class
sailboat, the first of many launchings for Mark Lindsay Boatbuilders, Ltd.

That summer Joan and Art Ellis took the boat to France and our first boat won.
As skipper, Joan became the first woman to win a double-handed Worlds, and the
first American in this class.

With its unique structural design, the boat was able to carry much higher rig
tension giving better sail shape control. We kept the boat exceptionally light
by using aircraft plywood. Puzzled by the boat’s speed, the class measurers
even drilled exploratory holes in the hull to try to uncover its secrets.

The following year Steve Benjamin took his new boat from our shop to win the
World Championship in Canada.

We turned next to a class that attracted many of the best sailors in the
world, the International 505. It was firmly believed that after these
lightweight, 16-foot dinghies were more than a year old, they would begin to
break down and become uncompetitive. Many of the winning boats were as much as
10% over the minimum weight in an attempt to keep them from falling apart.

We changed the materials and construction process to use vacuum-bagged epoxy,
carbon-fiber and Kevlar with Nomex honeycomb cores. Our 505 hulls were
dramatically lighter, both stiffer and stronger, and provided World
Championship wins for Steve Taylor, Steve Benjamin, Gary Knapp and Cam Lewis.
One of my great thrills was winning a North American Championship among that
crowd. Twenty-five years later, many of these same boats are still winning.

When two of our 505 owners decided to campaign for the Olympics in the Flying
Dutchman, they asked us to design and build the fastest possible boats for
them. The prototypes were built with the same carbon, Kevlar, honeycomb, and
epoxy technology of the 505s, but it was clear that we could push the
technology further.

In the early 1980s, we proposed and won a grant from the U.S. Olympic
Committee to design and build a high-temperature-cured, pre-impregnated epoxy
Flying Dutchman. With technological support from Sikorsky Aircraft, DuPont,
and Hexcel Corporations, and our own hull design and structural engineering,
we were able to build the hulls for this 20-foot boat that weighed in at 75
pounds and decks at only 25 pounds.

In 1984, Jonathon McKee and Carl Buchan sailed our boat to the United States
first Flying Dutchman World Championship and Olympic Gold Medal. The Lindsay
Flying Dutchman became a world standard and sailors came from Europe, South
America, Asia, and Australia to purchase the magic boat speed.

Yacht designer Bruce Farr came to us with a design for a 38-foot Lake Garda
racer for a Swiss customer. The laminate was the same Kevlar and honeycomb as
our 20-foot Flying Dutchman which had been rejected as unworkable by several
European builders.

Only five feet wide at the waterline, 16 feet wide on deck and with a towering
45-foot mast, the boat weighed only 2,000 pounds and carried seven crew on
trapezes. Launched the day before the first race, this lightweight flyer
bested the other 500 boats in the 100-mile race up and back the length of
Switzerland’s Lake Geneva, beating multihulls and boats half again her size.

In the early 1980s, Lindsay Boatbuilders began building ocean racers, starting
with MORC and IOR boats. Our first keel boat, a Graham and Schlageter 27 won
the MORC Internationals. More orders followed and the boats grew in size. In
the late ’80s, the IMS rule gave a new opportunity to use our vacuum-bagged
epoxy Kevlar construction with the Taylor 40. These boats combined the
technology of the latest racing designs with a layout and sail control systems
that were easy for the crews of families and friends who sailed the boats.

The Taylor 40 gave several local sailing teams their first successes at the
national level, with one overseas boat winning the Japan Cup for its new
owner. In 1992 our recently launched Schumacher 40 fulfilled her owner’s
dreams by winning her class in the Bermuda Race. I was privileged to join
owner Shep Poor and designer Carl Schumacher on that long thrash to weather in
the rain that left us with several sea stories and some great memories.

Over the years, many young and old sailors developed an affinity for Lindsay
rudders. From Optimist prams to Dennis Conner’s America’s Cup boats, these
foils had developed a mystique for successful performance.

In preparation for the 1992 America’s Cup, we were invited to build the
rudders for Bill Koch’s America 3 team and to bring our boatbuilding expertise
to Hercules Aerospace for the construction of their first hull.

I took a team to Hercules in Utah for two and half months where we helped
build the radical autoclaved and glued construction carbon and honeycomb AC
boat “Jayhawk”. Later we took another team to Detroit and set up a prepreg
carbon mast building shop to assemble the America 3 spars. Back in
Massachusetts we built more rudders and mast components. It was a thrill to
see them on the winning boat in the 1992 America’s Cup.

Our next undertaking was a series of Bruce Farr designed lightweight IMS
racing boats. The Farr 39 ML was built to order for a select group of owners
who came from such diverse sailing areas as the East Coast, Great Lakes,
Europe, and Japan.

These boats won the Japan Cup, the King’s Cup in Palma de Majorca, Antigua,
Block Island and Key West. Their lightweight cored epoxy glass and Kevlar
hulls were also subjected to the test of many miles of ocean passages,
including one reported peak speed of 30 knots while fleeing the leading edge
of a hurricane.

In 1996 I joined Scott Smith in forming the new venture, Boston BoatWorks, at
the site of the former Bethlehem Steel Shipyard in Boston, MA. We were very
excited to be bringing boatbuilding back to the East Boston waterfront where
Donald McKay had built and launched his famous clipper ships such as the
Flying Cloud.

In addition to our custom IMS ocean racers, we began using the same
pre-impregnated epoxy construction to build both power and
performance-oriented cruising boats.

Hydra Powerboats had built a reputation for racing catamarans and asked us to
build molds, hulls and decks for their new 50-knot production boat.
Vacuum-bagged in cored Kevlar and epoxy, these boats were employed for such
diverse uses as sport fishing and high-speed shuttle service on the Panama
Canal. Engineering the construction for unusually light weight and high speed
was a fascinating challenge.

Designer Chuck Paine had stayed in touch over the years since we shared an
office at Dick Carter’s in the ’70s, and brought us an opportunity to build
the hull and deck for a custom Kevlar/epoxy 47-foot sailing cruising yacht
with interior and fit-out to be completed by Morris Yachts in Maine. This
lovely pilothouse design based on an IMS racing hull shape, was the first of
several of Paine yachts, up to 62 feet in length, which we built this way.

These projects lead to our building the Boston BoatWorks 46, a Chuck Paine
pilothouse performance cruiser for a customer from Seattle, WA. We constructed
“Lustrous” for self-sufficient world cruising or exploration of the Pacific
Northwest, with a finely detailed varnished cherry interior, a full complement
of systems, carbon spars and gleaming custom finish. It was hard to part with
her when we were finished.

Our latest project with MJM Yachts is the realization of a longtime dream.
I first met Bob Johnstone at a 505 regatta in the early ’70s. We have always
appreciated each other’s work and I am delighted at this opportunity to work
with such a creative contributor to the profession and to the enjoyment of
boating. And when I can’t wait to get to work in the morning, I know I have
chosen the right occupation.

A celebration of his life will be held on Saturday, September 21, from 12
– 3 at the Shalin Liu Performance Center, Rockport, MA. Contributions in his
memory may be made to Courageous Sailing, Charlestown, MA.
www.courageoussailing.org
