PAUL CAYARD USA

Paul Cayard is best known for leading the Italian America's Cup team, "il Moro
di Venezia" to America's Cup in 1992. As manager and skipper of the Il Moro di
Venezia syndicate, Cayard won the first International America's Cup Class World
Championship in 1991. The following spring, he captured the Louis Vuitton Cup,
winning the right to race for the America's Cup.

  He has participated in the America's Cup, since 1983, when he was sail
trimmer for the late Tom Blackaller aboard the 12-meter yacht "Defender."
Cayard sailed again with Blackaller, as tactician, in 1987, aboard "the USA."
And, in 1995, Cayard was the helmsman/strategist aboard "Stars & Stripes" and
"Young America."

  His Italian sailing connection began, in 1984, at the Sardinia Cup, where he
was noticed by industrialist Raul Gardini. Cayard went on to skipper Gardini's
II Moro di Venezia in the 1985 Maxi World Championship. He, then, became
project manager for "II Moro di Venezia III," the boat that won the 1988 Maxi
World Championship. This Maxi campaign was the springboard for the
Gardini-Cayard connection to the America's Cup XXVIII.

  Cayard is a regular competitor in the Star Class, the pinnacle of one-design
sailing. He has won five continental challenges and won the World Championship
in 1988. Cayard believes that Star sailing has provided the base for all of his
other sailing achievements. He is also very active in offshore yacht racing. In
1995, he played an instrumental role in helping Italy win its first ever
Admiral's Cup, which is considered to be the world championship of yacht
racing. Cayard, with one foot in a cast, served as a tactician aboard the "
ILC-40 BRAVA Q8," which finished first in its class, in the 600-mile Fastnet
Race, the last and longest event in the Admiral's Cup series.

  Cayard was awarded "Yachtsman of the Year" by Yachting magazine's 1991 Racing
Honor Roll. Other honors include: Yachtsman of the Year" by Rothmans in 1992,
and Helmsman of the Year by Yacht Racing/Cruising in 1988.

Cayard's father is French-born and his wife, Icka, is Swedish. Cayard speaks
three languages: English, French and Italian.
