https://thedailysail.com/dinghy/06/36336/we-speak-to-ian-pinnell-about-his-love-for-505-sailing

505 obsession
We speak to Ian Pinnell about his love for 505 sailing

Thursday August 10th 2006, Author: Toby Heppell, Location: United Kingdom

While younger, nippier boats may have come onto the scene, very few have
stolen the hearts of so many top sailors as the 505 has done. Last week’s
World Championship at Hayling Island Sailing Club attracted an impressive
fleet of 113, among them a remarkable number of big names. Included in this
group of 505 devotees is Ian Pinnell of Pinnell and Bax fame and long time 505
sailor.

Well known throughout the sailing community Pinnell started sailing in Mirrors
and Enterprises. He has since sailed all manner of classes including the N12,
420, 470, Miracle, Enterprise, Fireball, 505, Soling, Mumm 30, Melges 24 and
International 14. Pinnell has won thirty-five World, European and National
championships and won the 1989 Endeavour (Champion of Champions) Trophy.

A regular at 505 events Pinnell along with crew Steve Hunt was, of course,
sailing this year at the World Championships in Hayling. The pair sailed
a reasonably consistent series finishing in eighth place overall,
a respectable position but one Pinnell himself is a little unhappy with. “It
was a very competitive fleet and quite a tough Worlds to win but we were
hoping for top three,” he explains. “We have done more training this year than
any other year in the boat and it was on home waters as well so there may have
been a little bit of pressure for us to do well.”

In such a tough International fleet it is always hard to post consistently
good scores but Pinnell feels they did not do justice to the boat speed they
were carrying. Specifically he feels they could have done significantly better
if they had not made some basic errors in the latter stages of some races. “On
    the last lap of each race we seemed to either go the wrong way on the run
    or someone would get just a little bit more pressure than us and sneak
    inside us. We lost a few points here and there and that really hurt us
    come the end of the week,” he says.

Being a sailmaker Pinnell does not just attend events to compete as a hobby,
he has a necessary interest in his sails being at the top of any fleet. In the
505 fleet this is the case as through his long association with the class and
many years of constant development Pinnell and Bax sails are now among the
most widely used in the 505 fleet. “We have our fair share of the market,” he
states modestly. “It was our spinnaker that won the Worlds – UK sailor and new
World Champions Mark Upton-Brown and Ian Mitchell were using one (below.) We
had a full suit which was third the German team of Jens Findel and Johannes
Tellen - then we had a suit on Ian Barker’s boat.” With the addition of
Pinnell himself this leaves the brand in the enviable position of having four
boats in the top ten who were using at least one Pinnell and Bax sail.



Overall Pinnell estimates that a fraction over half of the boats in the fleet
were using his sails, although this does not mean they were all using full
suits. “People using combinations of sails does happen a fair bit and probably
always will happen. People go away and try different things. Mark
(Upton-Brown) and Ian (Mitchell) got a new spinnaker from us literally a week
before the event and they loved it. We were really pleased because they were
dynamite downwind, I would say they won the event downwind actually,” he
comments.

Aside from the obvious sailmaking commitments to the class Pinnell is
a particularly passionate 505 sailor. “I think it is one of the nicest boats
I have ever sailed and I have sailed quite a lot of boats in my time. You can
sail it in any sort of breeze and any sort of wave conditions. The rig is
fully adjustable so you can de-power as and when you need to. It has got
a narrow waterline but is relatively wide overall which means it is very
quick. It is simply a great boat to sail,” he enthuses.

This sentiment has been echoed my many prominent sailors over the years and is
presumably a big part of the reason the class continues to attract so many big
names year after year.

Although people’s opinion of the boat does not seem to have changed in recent
years the boat itself, as with most classes, has. Pinnell says there has been
constant development and most recently this has focussed on the foils.
“Everyone is using higher aspect foils now and gybing centreboards. Recently
people have been using literally max length foils. The rudders for example are
now tiny but very, very long; this gives the sailor a great amount of feel and
manoeuvrability but keeps the drag to a relative minimum.” These changes along
with some rig development have effectively taken place to generate more power
in the light winds but also allow for both the rig and foils to be raked back
as the wind increases but leaves the boat controllable in a blow.



In these days of professional media driven Olympic sailing we are used to
seeing large fleets split into groups of around 25 with a qualifying/finals
racing format. It is easy to forget the times of 100 boat starts and long
races but this is exactly how the 505 remains. With gate starts for the 113
boat fleet and one or two races a day watching the 505 Worlds this year was
akin to watching racing five or even ten years ago, although obviously with
updated boats. “I think it is almost better really to race long courses in big
fleets,” states Pinnell. “I think part of the reason you have split fleets in
some boats like the 49er is for the purposes of the media so you can end up
with grand finals, etc. I am not too sure that is the way to go. Certainly
with big fleet sailing there is a real art to it, both starting and always
trying to get up their in the top few. It is a very different form of racing.”

Although this type of racing is becoming perhaps slightly less fashionable
Pinnell says as far as he knows there is no plan or need within the class to
change the format they currently use. By way of example he states the class
has always used gate starts because they believe it is both the easiest and
fairest way to start a fleet of over 100 boats.

Aside from 505 sailing, this year does not see Pinnell doing a great deal else
on the water. Following the Worlds he has put the boat away for a while and
will be taking some time away from it. To make a temporary break from the
class he will be sailing his International 14 for a few months and messing
around in that, but this will not last long as he will begin preparing for the
next World Championships in the autumn. “We have our next Worlds in Adelaide
in January – leaving Upton-Brown as World Champion for barely five months - so
we will try and do a bit of sailing before the boat goes into the container
for a bit of sunny sailing down under.”

Obviously while all this is going on the sailmaking business is ticking along
nicely and there are a number of projects being focussed on at the moment. One
of the main areas they are currently looking at is the Mirror class – a boat
they also have a very long association with. As we reported on at the Dinghy
Exhibition in March the class has recently abandoned their traditional gaff
rig in favour of a more modern, alloy Bermuda rig. This has had a marked
effect on the way the sails work and is something Pinnell and Bax are
investigating. The new rig officially became legal at the start of August
though there will certainly be tweaking to be done after this. Staying with
the youth classes Pinnell says they are constantly working on their Optimist
sails especially with the trickier radial cut sails now becoming widely used.

Aside from these two big developments it is largely business as usual for the
company as they continue to work with a variety of classes they have long
associations with. The Lark class begin their UK National Championship next
week and is a class Pinnell and Bax supply many sails to and so will be the
latest focus.

For Pinnell, it will have to wait until the next 505 Worlds in January before
we see him competing again. Perhaps all the training he has put in this year
will reap better dividends in Adelaide.

