The History of Butler 505 2987

When Michael Goldstein and Geoff Cashman e-mailed some notes about their
experiences at Hoover, their first 505 regatta, in what may be the oldest
racing 505 in North America, lots of people were reminiscing about old Butler
505s. One of them was Jim Willett, who had raced 2987 when it was new!  Geoff,

Concerning US2987, Skip Crowell and I were the first people to put her in the
water, back in 1969 at Lake Lemon. I snapped the tiller off within ten minutes
of launch trying to avoid a windward capsize. The boat was so fast, compared to
anything else on the lake, that we quickly ran out of lake and did our first
tack with Skip dragging in the water as we pivoted around his body. The tiller
was repaired in the Physics Department student machine shop by 5 a.m. the next
morning.

In Lake Lemon racing, with Thistles, Y-Flyers, and Flying Dutchmans. the 5-0-5
(almost) always finished first, crossing the line before the next boat even
rounded the previous mark. (The only lake race we lost occurred when I took my
brother out as crew (he had never sailed before, big mistake), and in the
confusion we sail most of the last upwind leg with the centerboard up. No other
races were even close.

A few weeks after the initial launch, the boat was entered in the Midwest
championships in Milwaukee, by Max Baumer, Walt Powers, and myself. We rotated
in pairs for the skipper/crew positions, and won the first race handily. That
boat would point 5 degrees higher than any of the other boats. In the next two
races the boat was dismasted twice in a blow, and the remaining races were
called because of weather.

A few weeks after that, Max and I entered the US2987 in the 1969 North American
Championships at Newport News, VA. We has practiced about 5 days a week in
preparation and the boat weighed in at 2 lbs. above minimum, just about the
weight of the new tiller housing we built in the shop. We were using a
beautiful set of Banks sails, with a spinnaker that could be carried without
collapse close hauled. This came in very handy in one of the championship races
were we lead the pack to the finish line and a boat from Ohio tried to override
us to windward (a downwind finish). We just luffed until their spinnaker was
wrapped about their mast, then we sailed away to finish first. At the end of
the series, US2987 was in overall 5th place, missing overall 3rd place by 30
seconds.

We always did well in the light airs, but we tended to capsize often in the
heavy wind races. In one of the North American Championship races, we tried to
fly the spinnaker from the trapeze, for the first time. We quickly dumped the
boat, but still recovered to get a 19th in that race. We never did learn how to
run a spinnaker from the trapeze on Lake Lemon; if the wind was strong enough,
you ran out of lake before you could get the spinnaker up and down!

I may be biased, but I think that US2987 was probably one of the finest boats
of her day, and I am very pleased that you are still sailing her.

Jim Willett

Jim Willett recently joined the 505 e-mail distribution list, after being out
of the class for about 25 years. He now lives in the Washington DC area, and is
looking for a used 505
