Rebuilding Parker 4134
Photo 8 shows the newly acquired Waterat Rudder from Ali, Thanks!, and the replacement section that I manufactured out of Mahogany. The structures were made to add stiffness to the boat as I removed the traveller system. The traveller was too high and would interfere with skipper and crew movement. However by removing the traveller I took away a great deal of rigity which the aluminum bar added. Again as the stresses of the boat will be compressed laterally, I made the grain of the wood parallel to the stress.
The sections have been coated twice in epoxy and will be glassed into position with "S" glass. I had considered Carbon Fibre but I kinda like the look of wood. At the stern you may notice the support section which I had to replace as a result of more rot. This ties the transom bar to the hull.

At the forward bulkhead you may notice that I have removed a great deal of the old Spinnaker tubing. This is to decrease tha amount of friction which these older tubes have as well it will give me better access to the tube when I repair the fracture.

Photo 9 is another angle shot of some of the work done around the bulkhead, mast step and spin tube.

Photo 10 show the newly developed mast step before I inserted it. The detail of the picture shows small repairs to areas on the CB Trunk, battlescars....

Mostly my battle with removal of old epoxy before I got smart and really used more furniture stripper to remove what seemed to be countless layers of tough crap. The stuff that I found worked well is Circa 1850, I do not know whether it is available in the US or not but it worked well at sofetening the really tough stuff as well as not being to harsh so as to delaminate the mahogany plywood or veneers.

Photo 11. Glamour shot.

Photo 12 shows the new mast step which was made by creating a pattern from the old rotted mast step and laminating two rigid pieces of Mahogany. The grain of the wood runs perpendicular so as to offer the greatest strength.

Note the section which has part of the original plywood missing. This had to be removed due to rot. The area was cleaned and debris was removed. It was allowed to dry over several days, as wood needs 20% moisture for rot to occur. I will rebuild the section leading to the mast step with "S" Glass and microballons. The "S" glass will also be run along side of the CB trunk as overr the years the glass in that area has deteriorated. S glass offers great rigidity with relatively light weight. Less expensive than Carbon, it has a cross section similar to regular fibreglass but it has an additional weave which is run at diagonals to the standard square weave.

Photo 13 is a shot of the launcher as I have removed the old drainage system which was responsible for the rot at the mast step and some in the front tank. I removed the drain section by using a Dremel tool with a fine cutting bit. The hose which was connected to the drain was also removed and now the water will just drain into the boat, leaving the forward tank dry.

The launcher tube was fractured mid way into the forward bulkhead and I had to remove a couple of sections which are not apparent from these photos. I will use a flexible piece of material such as arborite to make a reverse mold. You wax the arborite and apply gelcoat to the waxed area, no air dry is used in the preparation of the gelcoat. The arborite with the celcoat is put into position and then you fibreglass the missing section over the new mold. The glass and epoxy will bond to the gelcoat and once cured the mold ( arborite can be safely removed leaving a smooth surface against which the spinny will run.

Photo 14 is a shot of the third coat of epoxy on the foredeck. I will be sanding this down and then varnishing with Cetol from Sikkens, not too shabby of a shine!

I used East System resin; it is made in Canada and actually wets out better than West.

-Peter

