Rebuilding Parker 7678

These are photos of all glass Parker 505 7678, as it was being dissassembled by
George Saunders, who recently purchased it, and chose to make some significant
repairs. The first repair (compass holes in seat tanks) is shown. We expect to
have more images added as work progresses.

Close up shot of compass mounting hole. George decided to reduce weight by
going with a single compass rather than the two - sunk into the seat tanks -
that came with the boat. Both compasses were badly scratched and hard to read.
They had been mounted with epoxy, so removing them caused some minor damage
around the mounting hole. This is a close up of the hole in the port seat tank.
A portion of the port shroud extension turning block can be seen in the lower
left of the photograph.

A jig was used to hold up the first - inside - layer. George made a thin layer
for the inside, and used this jig to force it to conform to the tank shape,
while on the inside of the hole. A layer of microballoons went over the inside
layer, then another layer of glass over that. George made a mold to shape the
top layer using an adjacent portion of seat tank as a plug.


Close up of the repair. The repair after glassing but before any color and
cosmetic work. You are looking at the starboard tank, facing forward. The
turning block for the starboard shroud is in the upper right of the photo.

Prior to closing the compass mounting holes, the area near the shroud turning
block anchoring points, inside each seat tank, was carefully checked. The rail
is heavily loaded at this point. Both sides were fine, and neither required any
repair or reinforcement.


Photo of centerboard cap The core in the centerboard cap had crushed in several
places, and fittings were pulling out. When George opened it up, he discovered
a rotten, waterlogged balsa core. This photo was taken after a portion of the
top glass layer had been removed, exposing some of the core. Balsa is normally
light in color; the dark in the core is all rotten - and water saturated -
core.

The tops of the thwarts, the mast step, and the twin shroud lever system can
all be seen in this photograph. They were all removed after this photograph was
taken.


Close up shot of the rotten balsa core. Not a pretty site!

The centerboard cap portion that has already been removed is lying on the
bottom of the boat. You can see numerous holes were drilled in it. This was
from an earlier effort to dry out the core, and inject epoxy through the holes
to reinforce the centerboard cap.


More of a close up of rotten balsa! When balsa goes bad.....

Note the use of fiberglass mat in the layup (you can see it where the top layer
of glass is still partially in place).


Photo of centerboard trunk and thwarts with CB cap and step removed. George is
rebuilding a new cap and thwart top out of laminated wood, epoxy and carbon
fiber. He also took the opportunity to remove the Parker standard shroud
tension levers. They did not have enough travel to allow low rig tension at the
25' 8" rake setting and tight shrouds " at 25' 2" " of rake, as the North
American rig tuning sheets suggest.

Most of the pieces removed required minimal cutting, and came out with George's
bare hands.

If you compare the thwarts with the earlier images you will note that the
molded fiberglass tops of the thwarts have been removed, and the polyester
gelcoat that the wooden thwarts were "painted" with has been sanded off
removed. A small amount of rot was discovered underneath a fillet where a
thwart was bonded to the boat. Fortunately, the rest of the wooden thwart
structure was fine, and new wooden thwart tops will be bonded to it.

All wood should be sealed with epoxy!


Remaining portion of mast step. The centerboard trunk cap extends forward,
becomes part of the mast step, and stops at the watertight bulkhead. The new
cap will come foward all the way as well. The new structure will be wood, and
will bond to the structure that was left.

The repair around the shroud turning block anchor was done by the first owner.
Most of this series of boats have required that repair, as the wood where the
shroud turning blocks were anchored rotted out.  A closeup of the aft side of
the aft starboard thwart.

The picture illustrates some localized rot found behind one of the polyester
fillets..
