https://www.proboat.com/2020/06/old-505-dinghy-needs-new-home/

Old 505 Dinghy Needs New Home By Dieter Loibner, Jun 1, 2020

Crew out on the wire and a set of Dacron sails help the US 23 Windsong move
along nicely with owner Gil Peterson at the helm in Larchmont, New York,
sometime during the 1960s.

Larry Tuttle operates his Waterat workshop in La Selva Beach, California, on
the property of the Monterey Bay Academy surrounded by acres of agriculture
and a view of the Pacific Ocean. Fast-boat enthusiasts don’t mind the trek to
see Tuttle, who once partnered with Mark Lindsay to build some of the world’s
fastest 505s before moving to the West Coast, where he continued with the 505
dinghy but also made his mark with exquisite foils for racing boats of all
sizes.

One brilliant Sunday last February, Tuttle threw open his doors to a small
group of local sailing luminaries and this writer to show off US 23, the
oldest and perhaps most original 505 dinghy in this country, a stark contrast
to Tuttle’s high-tech boats. Built in 1954 in the United Kingdom, the 505
Windsong was the 23rd hull of this boat class, built by Fairey Marine,
a division of Fairey Aviation, which manufactured WWII plywood reconnaissance
planes difficult to detect by radar. Subsequently the company developed the
hot-molding technique that was later used in boatbuilding. (For more, see
“Fairey Marine,” Professional BoatBuilder No. 147, page 64.)

A Shipping Magnate’s Toy Windsong came to the U.S. as a gift to shipping
magnate Henry Mercer, who also owned the Phil Rhodes–designed 12-Meter
Weatherly. “That fall the boat competed in Yachting magazine’s third
One-of-a-Kind Regatta at Riverside Yacht Club on Long Island Sound with Eric
Olsen and Glenn Foster,” said Gil “Pete” Peterson, 77, a retired medical
device executive, whose father bought the boat from Mercer. “They won the
event on corrected time, with no time on the boat [before] and using an
International 14 mainsail.”

Vintage 505 Windsong Dieter Loibner | Professional BoatBuilder Magazine The
weight and shape of Windsong’s varnished hull are remarkably close to those of
her modern carbon fiber brethren, but the warm color of her mahogany hull
lends a touch of vintage class.

Once we removed the cover in Tuttle’s shop, virtual time travel began. The
hull shape was a 505 all right with its bespoke flat aft section, a stubby
bow, arched foredeck and wide side decks that curved down to the cockpit sole
doubling as flotation tanks. Everything looked and felt solid, but it had an
austere beauty compared to modern 505s, which can intimidate and confuse with
a bewildering number of adjustment lines.

A 505 Dinghy Once Was Simple

The California sun brought out US 23’s lustrous sheen of varnish and the color
of the hull’s mahogany. The deck and sailing hardware was made up of vintage
Tufnol turning blocks and Curry cleats, a rod-operated bronze mast jack,
a bare-bones traveler and mainsheet block arrangement, and an above-deck jib
furler. The white plastic cleat for the main and the golden Proctor aluminum
spars won’t qualify as original, but the Ratsey & Lapthorn Egyptian cotton
sail with the 1954 loft stamp certainly does.

The original plywood appendages had small bites out of their leading edges
from collisions with floating debris. Both appeared significantly shorter,
wider, and heavier than the carbon fiber boards and rudders coming out of
Tuttle’s shop today. The original centerboard’s elliptical shape evoked the
wing of a Spitfire fighter plane.

English Design, French Vision

Credit for the 505 design goes to the Brit John Westell, who started with the
Coronet, an 18‘ (5.48m) two-person dinghy—a handsome boat that stood out at
the International Yacht Racing Union (IYRU) selection trials for an Olympic
dinghy with trapeze at La Baule, France, in 1953. However, the IYRU took
a pass on the Coronet, choosing the larger Flying Dutchman instead, which held
Olympic class status from 1960 to 1992.

Vintage 505 Windsong

The bronze plaque is proof of origin. In the 1950s, Fairey Marine applied the
hot-molding technique to various sailing dinghies, including the 505 and Uffa
Fox’s Firefly. The firm also built a 23' (7m) runabout to a deep-V design
licensed by C. Raymond Hunt.

Vintage 505 Windsong

The hardware to adjust traveler, mainsheet, and centerboard features
a potpourri of materials like Tufnol, plastic, stainless steel, and aluminum.

Vintage 505 Windsong Egyptian cotton was still the sailcloth of choice in 1954
at Ratsey & Lapthorn, a leading sail loft of the day.  Vintage 505 Windsong
The voluptuously shaped low-aspect-ratio appendages of the US 23 were made
from wood.  Vintage 505 Windsong The bronze mast heel sits on a threaded
rod-operated nut used to adjust rig tension.  1 2 3 4 5 <
>
The French Caneton dinghy association asked Westell to shorten the Coronet’s
hull to fit its size requirements. Obligingly, he removed 6“ (152.4mm) from
the bow and about 1‘ (305mm) at the stern, making the boat not just shorter
but also lighter, less expensive, and more maneuverable, powered by an upwind
sail area of 150 sq ft (13.94m²), which eventually grew to 175 sq ft
(16.26m²). Now 5.05m (16‘7“) long, the boat became the 505 and was immediately
elevated to international status.

As one of the earliest 505 dinghies, US 23 is a specimen of this durable yet
forward-looking two-person performance dinghy, which retained its key
characteristics while keeping up with the times. The boats hold up and fetch
good money on the used-boat market. Well-maintained and -campaigned older
hulls can still win titles. “Let’s control what matters and open the rest to
development,” Tuttle said. His comment summarized the class philosophy that
over the years permitted not only fiberglass but also Kevlar, Nomex honeycomb
cores, and carbon fiber/epoxy construction. “The best thing is the class is
open to everyone who wants to come and race,” he added.

Vintage 505 Windsong Dieter Loibner | Professional BoatBuilder Magazine West
Coast 505 royalty assembled in La Selva Beach, California (from left): Paul
Tara, longserving member of the Santa Cruz 505 fleet, arranged the meeting;
Gil Peterson; and Larry Tuttle, whose Waterat shop produces boats and
appendages for performance-minded clients.

Relative nobodies can duke it out with top professional talent racing 505
dinghies, and while many other classes struggle with participation, the 505
still draws large fleets across Europe, Australia, and the U.S., currently the
dominant nation, with four boats in the top five at the 2019 World
Championships. That includes winners Mike Martin and Adam Lowry, who repeated
their 2016 success. Both also received the 2019 Rolex Yachtsman of the Year
award. The most recent 505 world championship in Fremantle, Australia, was
Martin’s fourth title (once as a crew) and 11th podium finish. Check out the
505 Wiki page with lists of the medalists at the Worlds, including an
impressive number of U.S. sailors.

Two Owners in 66 Years Vintage 505 Windsong Dieter Loibner | Professional
BoatBuilder Magazine Gil Peterson’s father bought US 23 from her original
owner, shipping magnate Henry Mercer.

Owner Peterson sailed US 23 most of his life, beginning in the late 1950s when
his father responded to a newspaper ad from Mercer, who’d kept the boat in
a garage on his estate in Rumson, New Jersey. “My first sensation? Wow, it’s
like flying—so responsive, so light, so powerful,” Peterson remembered. “You
take off from the dock, and it’s like a rush.” The family sailed Windsong on
Twin Lakes, their summer vacation spot in Pennsylvania, but later Peterson
moved the boat to the Larchmont Yacht Club, where he joined a budding East
Coast fleet.

As a class secretary he participated in the 1963 World Championship at his
home club. The French, the Brits, and a Dane named Paul Elvstrom were the ones
to beat at the time, with Americans Henry Shefter and John Marshall in the
mix. But two unknown Australians, Brian Price and Chris Hough, stole the show
and made a lasting impression starting with the practice race.

“On the first beat, they were mid-fleet, but at the windward mark they took
off on a broad reach,” Peterson said. “Nobody followed, so they went on
a flyer by themselves while the rest turned dead downwind.” At the bottom of
the course, the Aussies had done a horizon job on the fleet. They kept doing
this to great effect, winning the Worlds and “singlehandedly changing the way
we sailed this boat downwind,” Peterson said. The 505 tried to win Olympic
status, but the class eventually gave up, a smart move that ensured control of
its destiny. Said Peterson: “We were not successful, and in hindsight, this
would have been a bad idea.”

When Peterson moved again, this time to the San Francisco Bay Area, Windsong
moved, too. She was becoming an antique, but he kept her in trim and close to
original condition, sailing for fun and with his grandchildren. “We downsized
and lost garage space, so now I’m looking for a new permanent home where US 23
is appreciated,” he explained standing in the glaring sun and gusty northerly
breeze outside Tuttle’s shop with Paul Tara, another 505 veteran, who
facilitated this impromptu meeting and still sails in the competitive Santa
Cruz fleet. “It’s the oldest 505 dinghy in the country and one of the oldest
in the world, perhaps something for a museum,” Peterson mused, adding, “I
don’t want it to become a bar for Mike Martin.”

Waterat Sailing Equipment, 565 McQuaide Dr., Watsonville, CA 95076 USA, tel.
831–768–1520.

US 505 Class Association.



