Death of a Warrior

All boats die some day; that doesn't make it any easier to see it happen. Ooh,
Aah, Baby!, Stu Kelly's beautifully restored Parker 505, number 3885 died
after completing a race - and winning Classic Division - in the East Coast
Championship. It was the first time the boat had been raced since the rebuild.

3885 was a beautiful boat. In what must have been a labor of love, Stu had
spent a documented 400 hours rebuilding it, after buying it for a few hundred
dollars after seeing it by the side of the road. Much of the woodwork,
including the deck and rails was new. Some of the fittings were upgraded. The
boat had been completely repainted a gorgeous Corvette red.  The $2000 paint
job was not the only significant restore cost, as Stu had another $2500 on
materials documented. At the WRSC open house in 1994, it was frequently
mistaken for a new boat. Recently, Stu built a new rudder, installed a new
tiller, rigged a modern twing system, put in spectra lines, and so on. After
completing a race - Saturday's second - Stu and Beth decided one race was
enough. They capsized on the way in. It appears that the bow tank leaked, and
water got into it after the capsize. After getting the boat upright, Stu and
skipper Beth Wieser thought they could sail in. They made it part way, but the
boat was increasingly difficult to sail (probably due to the water in the
tanks), and capsized again.  Soon after, they were unable to right the boat.
Being in shallow water about 200 yards off shore, the mast must have stuck in
the mud.

About this time the mast must have broken, right at the spinnaker halyard
sheave box, just below the shrouds and trapeze wires. Without the rig tension
to hold it, the mast came out of the step. The broken end jammed in the mud,
while the step end pounded into the hull, puncturing a hole on one side of the
mast step.

After spending some time sitting on the upturned hull until someone on shore
spotted them, Stu and Beth were rescued from the now waterlogged boat, and
were taken in. The boat was left anchored and marked by an orange buoy, for
the night. Once ashore, Stu called his insurance company, and nothing was done
while waiting for the insurance company to determine what they wanted to do.

We went to check on it Sunday afternoon after the regatta was over. To our
surprise, the boat was still on the surface, though mostly submerged. The boat
was clearly damaged - we could see the hole the mast had punched through the
bottom - but we thought could still be salvaged. It was sickening to see the
boat on the surface, but be unable to rescue it, as it was almost dark, and we
did not have the equipment to salvage it properly. We did not feel that we
could try to salvage the boat without the acquiescence of the insurance
company; we left reluctantly. It took several days for the insurance company
to decide what to do. When they finally sent a surveyor to look at the boat,
he was unable to find it. The following weekend, Stu and I went looking for
it. To our amazement, we found the boat, still afloat. It had been dragged by
the tide about two miles south. There was another hole in the bottom, and it
was sitting rather lower in the water. Only the centerboard and the bow of the
upside down hull were above the surface.

I swam over to it, but was unable to assess the damage, beyond that which
could be seen from the surface.

We gave the insurance company "salvager" the location of the boat based on
bearings to landmarks, and left for a quick lunch. The insurance company had
decided not to spend the money to carefully salvage the boat, so the salvage
operation consisted of tying a line to the bow, and dragging it, full of
water, still anchored, and with the rig and sails next to it in the water,
some ten miles to the salvager's marina. We pulled up along side part way
through the tow. The boat was almost upright, and we could see a large hole
into the top of the starboard seat tank.

Stu and I were at the marina when the boat was dragged in almost completely
submerged. Several holes could be seen in the tanks and hull. The rudder had
been chafed badly against the hull. Being almost completely submerged, we
could not assess the extent of the damage.

I returned a few days later, after the boat had been hauled out, to see it.
Much of the paint had chafed off, the sails were torn, fittings ripped out,
mast broken, etc.

There were three holes through the bottom, one that went through the top of
the seat tank, out the side, and then through the bottom.

The mast was broken at the spinnaker halyard sheave. One shroud had chafed
most of the way through, the other had pulled the shroud fitting out of the
boat, destroying a magic box in the process. The new rudder was destroyed. The
chafe was extensive, with paint and varnish worn off in numerous places, and
erosion deep into the wood or fiberglass. The mainsail was torn all along the
foot, and the jib, though in one piece, was quite mangled.

It is hard to say how all the damage occurred. We know the first hole in the
bottom happened during the second capsize. I believe there were no other holes
in the bottom the next day. How much of the damage happened while the boat
spent the week upside down with the broken mast stuck in the bottom, and how
much happened while being towed is hard to tell. I would expect the loads
placed on a boat while under tow, full of water, with an anchor and a complete
rig in the water all tied to it, must be enormous. I am surprised that the
remnants of the rig, and the traveller - which the anchor was tied to - were
still with the boat when it got to the salvagers marina.

Conclusions

In retrospect, there are things that could have been done to prevent the loss
of Ooh, Aah, Baby All dinghies should be buoyancy tested. The procedure is
described in the Fixing up older 505s article.

Leaks should be fixed.

The mast could be bolted to the step, so that it does not come out of the step
even if the rig goes slack.

It might have been possible to tie a life jacket to the mast head to prevent
the boat turtling. Given that there were two people and two lifejackets, no
lifejackets were available to do this with.

Perhaps the key point is that a boat must be rescued as soon as possible to
minimize damage. Had we been given the go-ahead, the boat might have been
rescued the following afternoon.

Insurance

Settling with the insurance company took some time. They started by suggested
that the boat was only worth $1300 based on BUC value, nothing close to the
$8000 that the boat was insured for. After some discussion, and Stu showing
receipts etc. they went up to $2300. Under further pressure from a very
determined Stu - pointing out that his car and house was insured with the same
company - convinced them to go up to $3300. Stu then called the CEO, and
a regional VP, and the insurance company went up to $5000 and the boat, which
Stu accepted. Stu spent considerable time pursuing this, documenting all
calls, etc. He feels he could have pursued this further by going to the State
Insurance commission, but had already spent a great deal of time trying to
resolve the matter.

It is not yet clear whether Stu will attempt to repair the boat, or whether it
will be permanently retired.

We should all consider the implications for insuring our own boats. We should:

What the policy is all about
Ask what happens if the boat sinks tomorrow
Ask what happens if the boat falls off the trailer
Ask what does insured value really mean
Discuss a stated value policy

