Rebuilding Parker 4134 Photo 8 shows the newly acquired Waterat Rudder from
Ali, Thanks!, and the replacement section that I manufactured out of Mahogany.
The structures were made to add stiffness to the boat as I removed the
traveller system. The traveller was too high and would interfere with skipper
and crew movement. However by removing the traveller I took away a great deal
of rigity which the aluminum bar added. Again as the stresses of the boat will
be compressed laterally, I made the grain of the wood parallel to the stress.
The sections have been coated twice in epoxy and will be glassed into position
with "S" glass. I had considered Carbon Fibre but I kinda like the look of
wood. At the stern you may notice the support section which I had to replace
as a result of more rot. This ties the transom bar to the hull.

At the forward bulkhead you may notice that I have removed a great deal of the
old Spinnaker tubing. This is to decrease tha amount of friction which these
older tubes have as well it will give me better access to the tube when
I repair the fracture.

Photo 9 is another angle shot of some of the work done around the bulkhead,
mast step and spin tube.

Photo 10 show the newly developed mast step before I inserted it. The detail
of the picture shows small repairs to areas on the CB Trunk, battlescars....

Mostly my battle with removal of old epoxy before I got smart and really used
more furniture stripper to remove what seemed to be countless layers of tough
crap. The stuff that I found worked well is Circa 1850, I do not know whether
it is available in the US or not but it worked well at sofetening the really
tough stuff as well as not being to harsh so as to delaminate the mahogany
plywood or veneers.

Photo 11. Glamour shot.

Photo 12 shows the new mast step which was made by creating a pattern from the
old rotted mast step and laminating two rigid pieces of Mahogany. The grain of
the wood runs perpendicular so as to offer the greatest strength.

Note the section which has part of the original plywood missing. This had to
be removed due to rot. The area was cleaned and debris was removed. It was
allowed to dry over several days, as wood needs 20% moisture for rot to occur.
I will rebuild the section leading to the mast step with "S" Glass and
microballons. The "S" glass will also be run along side of the CB trunk as
overr the years the glass in that area has deteriorated. S glass offers great
rigidity with relatively light weight. Less expensive than Carbon, it has
a cross section similar to regular fibreglass but it has an additional weave
which is run at diagonals to the standard square weave.

Photo 13 is a shot of the launcher as I have removed the old drainage system
which was responsible for the rot at the mast step and some in the front tank.
I removed the drain section by using a Dremel tool with a fine cutting bit.
The hose which was connected to the drain was also removed and now the water
will just drain into the boat, leaving the forward tank dry.

The launcher tube was fractured mid way into the forward bulkhead and I had to
remove a couple of sections which are not apparent from these photos. I will
use a flexible piece of material such as arborite to make a reverse mold. You
wax the arborite and apply gelcoat to the waxed area, no air dry is used in
the preparation of the gelcoat. The arborite with the celcoat is put into
position and then you fibreglass the missing section over the new mold. The
glass and epoxy will bond to the gelcoat and once cured the mold ( arborite
can be safely removed leaving a smooth surface against which the spinny will
run.

Photo 14 is a shot of the third coat of epoxy on the foredeck. I will be
sanding this down and then varnishing with Cetol from Sikkens, not too shabby
of a shine!

I used East System resin; it is made in Canada and actually wets out better
than West.

-Peter

------------

A NOT SO DRUNKEN OUTING:
How I spent a recent Sunday helping to rescue a 505 from the depths of the Chesapeake
-- Allan Freedman

Perhaps the best place to begin this tale of rescue is with a few images that I
will not soon forget. It is a chilly fall, grey day. It is not blowing all that
hard. But it is breezy for the Chesapeake, with a 10-15 knot Northerly. The
temperature is in the 60s. The 505 is on its side, sinking fast, looking like a
dead white shark that's gone belly up. Ali Meller is in the water. He is
wearing a blue hat, wet suit, life jacket -- the usual sailing gear -- and
grinning. Now mind you, I am fucking cold just standing on the whaler,
alternately driving and trying not to run Ali over and then taking orders from
Barney Harris, who informs us he once ran a small boat salvage operation in
High School. But it is the image of Ali that I cannot get out of my mind. He
volunteers to jump in the water, starts tying orange buoys to the hull to
prevent it from sinking, dives down to investigate whether the last rescue crew
attached an anchor line.

At one point, Ali goes under for so long -- just swimming around, checking out
the situation -- that Barney shows a bit of worry. I wonder if we will ever see
the guy again. Ali is in the water for over an hour. When we finally get the
boat going, and on its way in, Ali takes a comfortable seat near the transom.
We are towing the boat in backwards. He could not be happier. I am simply
pleased we are headed in and have not left the boat for salvage. But Ali looks
like he would chose to be no place else on earth. When we are safely within the
river and it's clear that all is well, he calls up to us for a beer. Barney
slips a Bud Light into a plastic container and floats it back on a tow line. At
one point, he grabs an extender line. Ali grabs the beer out of the water, and
cracks it open and flashes the grin of victory.

The day had started with the promise of some great sailing. Just a week after
the worlds, we managed to turn out ten boats for the West River Sailing Club's
annual Carl Miller regatta Oct 3-4. Saturday conditions were light and
frustrating. But Sunday brought wind. Peter Epstein had driven his vintage
Parker down from Toronto for the occassion and seemed pumped for the event. But
by day's end, the boat showed signs that it was literally not sea worthy. The
tanks filled up with water and the boat all but sank on the race course. The
race committee could not figure out a way to tow the boat back in, so they
transported Peter and his skipper back to dry land. Peter bought the boat for a
dollar, and he had little expectation he would see it again. He hoped we could
salvage some of the equipment.

The ride out on the whaler is bumpy and wet. Barney and Ali crack open beers. I
drive. After hitting a rough spot, Barney asks, "Have you ever driven one of
these things before?" Peter's boat is just outside and downwind from the mouth
of the river. I'd say it's in 8-12 feet of water. We drive around the boat to
assess the damage. Three quarters of the hull is submerged. After Ali dives in,
he attempts to right the boat. Each move he makes forces the remaining air
pockets from the tanks. At one point, the boat is completetly submerged, with
only the mast sticking out of the water.

The basic plan, hatched by Barney, is to tie a line around the front of the CB
trunk and then run it through the transom and tow the dead 505 backwards. But
once we get everything hooked up and begin to tow the hull stays put like a
huge sea anchor. We are convinced that the race committee must have anchored
the hull. We look everywhere. Ali dives to the leeward/underwater side. We
learn later that no anchor had been attached, which we eventually figure out.

We get the boat going and back to shore through a combination of luck, timing
and trial and error. At one point, Barney gave me the impossible task of
holding the tow line so I could keep it exactly lined up with the engine. I act
like a human hitching post. Only one problem: I could not hold onto the line.
In the end, and after much protestation on my part, we cleat it off. Ali keeps
the boat level - going from wire to wire - just long enough for Barney to pick
up speed in the whaler and pop the boat out of the water. We generate enough
lift that the water flows out of the boat. Ali smartly empties one of the side
tanks and water flows out, providing even greater buoyancy. He then empties the
other one. Within a few minutes, Ali is sitting comfortably near the transom,
dry as a bone, looking as if he is ready for that beer.

The players:

Barney Harris, 38 plus or minus, known engineer, former salvage operator.
Greatest weakness: Albacore sailing.  Ali Meller, 40, recently released from St
Elizabeth's and a Navy Seal wannabe. Heard muttering under water: But if I
don't write the press release who will.  Allan Freedman, 33, author. Voted part
of the most cultured 505 team at the Hyannis worlds. Biggest lament: Regrets
505 class decision to veto hosting Gilbert and Sullivan production at the next
worlds.  505 4134, Parker. Registered by J. Margary/G. W. Cooke in Great
Britain in 1971. Moved to Bermuda, and eventually to Toronto Canada, bought by
Peter Epstein in March of 1998 and gradually being rebuilt and reriged.


Peter Epstein's comments

505 4134 Rescue
I just finished reading Allan's description of the WRSC's own SEAL team; Ali
Meller, Barney Harris, and Allan Freedman. Ali said Old 5ohs never die they
just take on a little more water. In this case it was particularly true. I'll
admit that I was perhaps a little ambitious taking the old gal out for a sail
without having done all of the sea trials necessary but I was determined to
sail her as well as the encouragement from all at WRSC last weekend.
Greg and I were rounding the last mark before the finish when during the gybe
I got caught still hooked to my trapeze line. I pulled us over onto the port
tank which had a hole (temporarily repaired which didn't last) the tank filled
up suprisingly fast and I knew we were in trouble. Despite my sounding of my
whistle and waving my arms the race committee did not see us. More quickly now
with the added effect of the chop the boat was taking on a lot of water. We
attempted to right the boat several times and tow her in but each attempt
failed. Finally, exhausted from the ordeal in the water I asked Dirk Schwenk
(driver of RC crash boat) to tie a Hippity Hop to the tow lines so that we
would know the wherabouts of the boat. I grabbed the Waterat rudder and tiller
and thought that that would be the only salvageable part of my boat.

Upon returning to the dock in a stinkpot and not my lovingly restored (well
I still have some work to do..."grin") Parker, I was met by Ali, Alan and
Barney who looked incredulous at our return without my 5o5. Immediately Ali
assembled the WRSC SEAL and Salvage team who after well over 2 angst ridden
hours returnd with a rather soggy Parker.

I want to use this forum to take the opportunity to thank Ali, Allan, and
Barney as well as the WRSC for their monumental efforts to extricate my boat
from the bay and return her safely to sail another day. I will be forever in
your debt.

Regards,

Peter Epstein
CAN 4314 "Over Easy"
