The Lindsay 6987 Rebuild
Last Updated December 13, 1995

After talking up the idea of fixing up older boats, I found an opportunity to
do so when I "met" Dave Gruver on Compuserve, and he told me he had and old
Lindsay 505 that needed some TLC and some time on the water. Buying 6987 was
a means to both get another great boat on the water, and race in the '95
Canadian and North American Championships in Vancouver. I bought the boat site
unseen, after Dave delivered it to Waterat for a quick evaluation.

Lindsay 6987 was probably built in 1980. Unlike the very first of the
Lindsay-hulled Lindsays, 6987 had cored seat tanks. The first owner was John
Gilmour. The boat was in Seattle for awhile, and then returned to the Bay Area
with Dave Gruver. Like all Lindsays, the boat was rigged by the first owner
not by the builder and was probably altered over time, by the various owners.

The boat I bought for $3000 was as follows:

The original yellow hull had been painted red (without sanding all old gelcoat off)

- Some of the woodwork had been painted gray
- An old "d" mast was spliced at deck level
- Schaeffer boom
- Lindsay CB, Waterat rudder
- Shortened tiller
- Several suits of sails, including a decent set of Norths, though they were
  not the Ethan Bixby North design

I bought the boat after Larry Tuttle looked at it, and gave me an estimate on
what it would cost to fix up the way I wanted it. Waterat did the following
work on the boat.

Close compass holes in seat tanks

- Other "spot repairs" on seat tanks
- Repair damaged parts of foredeck and repaint
- Repair transom bar
- Repair other damaged areas
- Refinish foils
- Modify rudder to fit a standard tiller
- Replace and move fittings to simplify rig and make it "like a waterat"
  - this eventually resulted in all but four fittings between the diagonal
    bulkheads and the transom being removed.
- Polish hull
- Touchup repaint some areas
- Re-rig mast to standard Waterat specifications
- repaint floor
- Install adjustable forestay
- Install new tube and tackle for ram, lead to tanks
- Install new twing system with handle
- Install new guy cleats

To assist the project, I went through my spare parts supply and provided
standing rigging, an unused spinnaker pole, and extra blocks. I also used my
sails, one of my Waterat centerboards and my tiller and tiller extension when
John Fry and I raced the boat on the West Coast.

Larry did an incredible job on the boat. While it could have gone sailing the
day I bought it, it needed lots of TLC. The boat as delivered by Larry was
- with the addition of my sails, CB, tiller and extension - ready to race at
the North American Championship. Apart from doing the maintenance, Larry
re-rigged the boat to meet my request that it be as much like my Waterats as
possible. This included the visual queues that I use to set up the rig.
Waterat removed the vast majority of the fittings, installed an adjustable
forestay, put some of the old fittings, some of my spares, and some new
fittings back on the boat, and even marked on the tank where the Waterat
thwart would be, so I could judge my jib lead position from it.

The majority of the fittings on the boat now were not on it when it arrived at
Waterat, and along with the re-rigged boat, I received several boxes of
fittings that had been removed. Given the weight of these surplus fittings,
I have to believe the boat is now lighter than when it arrived at Waterat!

In the two regattas that John and I raced, we noted only three problems. One
was that moisture was getting into one part of the foredeck from the inside,
and this moisture was lifting the finish off the top layer of the deck. The
vang attachment point came off the mast on the practice day, and the spinnaker
halyard cleat tore out a small knee bonded to the floor and the side of the
centerboard trunk. We ignored the foredeck and easily repaired the other two
problems. The boat was weighed during the events, and was about 5 kg
overweight. I believe a significant part of this was the old spliced and
reinforced mast; it felt rather heavier than a new D.

There was some interest in buying the boat from people in the Washington DC
area, who would then join my fleet, so I had the Hendersons bring the boat,
trailer and dolly (a Derek Campbell special) to Kingston for CORK. I purchased
a few more parts so that the boat could be sailed without using my spares, and
sailed CORK with Matthew Edwards, the new owner.

Matthew took the boat home, and only days later a tree branch fell on it,
putting a softball sized hole in the foredeck. Fortunately, the boat was
insured, and a new deck was built by J. Hamilton in Annapolis. Matthew also
bought a partially rigged mast, which I helped him complete to Waterat
specifications. With a brand new mast, new foredeck and completely re-rigged,
the boat is ready for the racing circuit. It is an excellent boat, and is
completely competitive. John Fry and I finished 3rd at the North American
championship, with a shot at winning going into the last race (we sailed our
throwout instead!)

I sold the boat for $5000, which was a slight loss on what I paid for it, and
spent at Waterat. I also donated some spares for it. It cost $300 to get the
boat shipped back to the East Coast. The total out of pocket costs are rather
less than what it would have cost me to ship a boat both ways to do the two
events, or to charter a decent boat on the West Coast. Overall, the project
was a success. I was able to sell both 6987, and my older Waterat, 7772, into
my fleet, and was able to turn around and ask Larry to start rebuilding
another older boat, 7200, for me. My current plan is to race 7200 at the '96
Worlds in Australia.

-Ali
alimeller@aol.com
