SWE,Krister Bergström

"Sailing 5o5 is the most exciting thing I know"

Krister Bergstrom has an impressive list of qualifications in 5o5. He has won
the World Championship four times, the European Championship once, the Swedish
championship 11 times, the Scandinavian Championship 3 times, the Golden Anchor
once and finally he has been nominated yachtsman of the year by the Swedish
Yachting Association. Krister is a long-time member of GKSS, the Royal
Gothenburg Yacht Club.

Born 1956, raised in Gothenburg on the Swedish westcoast, now (February '96)
lives in Stockholm with wife Helen and their two children, Oskar and Hanna.
Krister has lived here for the last 10 years. He works as a highschool teacher
at the Tyreso Gymnasium.

A Way of Living

Krister started to sail the 5o5 in 1974 together with Martin, one of his three
younger brothers. Before the 5o5 they had been sailing the Trapez, a racing
dinghy designed by Paul Elvstrom, as many others in Sweden and Denmark who
joined the 5o5 class at that time did. Krister has since then remained true to
the class and is today one of the legends within 5o5 sailing. The next Worlds
in Denmark will be his 17th!

The motive power behind his success is great zeal in sailing, which makes him
go sailing time after time. Today, sailing is not only an interest of his, but
it has also become a way of living. He is not only talented and interested in
sailing but he also has the physical qualities needed to become a top class
yachtsman. He is strong and flexible, has good balance and he quickly
apprehends and understands the different situations that occur in races. These
qualifications together with a well planned and carried through training have
led him and his crew to success.

His training consists of three different parts - physical, mental and sailing.
The physical training is mostly running to get in good conditions and weight
lifting for shoulders and backside. The mental training increases his ability
to concentrate which helps him to systematically and thoroughly think of the
start, the first windward sailing and so on. After a race he analyzes
advantages and disadvantages.

Serious "Here and Now"

The most important training is of course the hours spent in the boat. Krister
has about 200 hours of efficient sailing practice before he participates in a
championship. It is the amount of sailing that separates the top class from the
less successful ones. He is of the opinion that the elite are both practicing
and competing more than the rest and he emphasizes the importance of being
serious "here and now" in order to achieve ones goal.

But how is he able to make the boat go at such great speed?

- Training, training and again training he replies. You have to manoeuvre the
boat and sheet the sails right and at the same time have a good balance in the
boat. The trimming is more like "the cream on the cake".

The Crew

He has been sailing with a number of crew during his career. The most
important, he thinks, is not to compare the different crew but to take care of
the qualities of each man. The difficulty in cooperation between helmsman and
crew is not, which can be assumed, the sailing itself and the technical parts
but to get a well working communication. It is very important that you
understand one anothers expressions. In a regatta Krister takes no unnecessary
risks at the beginning and he concentrates on the "safe sailing". At the end,
however, Krister does not hesitate to put everything at stake if necessary and
take a course of his own in order to maximize his chances to secure a front
position. It can sometimes go completly wrong, like it did in the final race at
the '96 Worlds in Townsville.

Current Plans

He has this winter, besides reaching the age of 40, bought a new 5o5 (his
tenth) from Rondar. He is working on new smaller rudder & centerboard designs
close to the very extreme type made of carbon fiber.

The Bergstrom Brothers

Besides Martin, whom Krister sailed 5o5 with during four years in the 70's,
there is Rasmus - seen as crew on above picture. Rasmus is sailing One Design
14's and is occasionally crewing for Krister when the regular ones can't make
it. This will be harder for several years, as Rasmus is on a 3 year assignment
for Volvo in Singapore and soon moving to Brisbane/Australia!

The 3rd brother is Jan, currently sailing J24. He finished 4th at the '96
Europeans in Marstrand. Jan has been sailing 470 for many years with Rasmus and
others as crew. Jan has spent a couple of years sailing 505, also with great
success. Jan finished 3rd after Krister 2nd at the Worlds in La Rochelle in
1987.

Another photo on Krister (an old one from the Worlds in Cork ´82) and his
previous boat. Here is how the sailing water in Nynashamn outside Stockholm,
looks like this time of year.
